Start it now.
>> I should have picked up on that myself.
Try it again.
>> All right.
Go ahead.
>> We're good.
>> Yeah.
>> Now the pressure's on me because we're
being reported. So I feel a little extra
pressure. So
>> I get a little shaky voice. Please
forgive me. So, um, so one of the things
that I wanted to talk about is just
targeted reductions because I think it's
really important to point out that the
proposed budget that I'm discussing with
you already reflects the removal of
approximately $800,000 from items,
personnel, equipment, services that had
initially been requested from budget
owners. So, they include things like
equipment, furniture, and facilities
maintenance and upgrades. Um, we moved
some to a lease package. Other things
will be included in future budgets. We
reduced our summer school credit
recovery staffing. We reduced the number
of six assignments that we have. Um, and
we eliminated four positions. So, high
school business teacher um that was
going to be vacated at the end of the
school year, a special education
pareducator, a hallway monitor para
educator, and a library media para
educator. So again, those in totality,
the things that we have removed already
from the budget total approximately
$800,000.
If if we hadn't done that, um the
increase that I would have presented to
the board of education back in January
and that I'd be discussing with you
tonight would be a 7.42%
increase over the current year's budget.
I I just think that's a really important
context for people to have as we move
forward through this process.
Uh
>> can you can you explain what the re
reduction of the sixth assignments?
>> Yes, it's a it's a it's a great
question. Yeah, it's so so essentially
at the middle at the secondary level,
the way that it the way that it works
with regards to what teachers are
required per contract to teach is
generally that they teach five sections
or five classes over the course of the
day, right? One class or one of those
additional periods is a lunch. One of
those periods might be a prep, the the
ones that they're not teaching, I should
say.
And then another one might be a you know
a collaborative time or some other duty
assigned to them. But essentially
basically secondary teachers are
expected to teach five classes over the
course of a school day.
Sometimes though it is necessary for us
to say to an individual teacher who is
contractually obligated to teach five
classes in a day, hey we need you to
teach a sixth assignment or a sixth
class. And with that comes additional
compensation. And so again, when I talk
about a reduction of six assignments, I
we look at, okay, you know, hey, you
know, this teacher currently or this
teacher was um, you know, has
historically taught a six assignment or
is teaching a six assignment this year,
but next year we're not going to have
him teach that six assignment. Does that
make sense, Liz?
>> Great.
>> Yep. That that's perfect. Thank you so
much.
>> Absolutely. Any any other questions
about that,
Liz? The only thing I'll say to that and
actually to the collective group, the
the reason that six assignments are a
useful tool for us is because it enables
us to pro to make sure that we have a
wide array of course offerings for
students um without having to take on
additional staff. It's really difficult
as you can imagine to hire people at a
you know hey we need to hire you but we
just need to hire you for one class or
hey we need to hire you but we just need
to hire you to teach two classes. It is
financially unwise to do that. It is
much better to do six assignments. Um
but again when we can reduce them we try
to reduce them.
Uh if we could go to the next slide
please it would be great. Thank you. So,
our capital budget is obviously
different from our operating budget. As
I said, it's a $500,000 budget uh
proposal for next year. Um, it enables
us to address timely issues that need to
be addressed. I have a couple of photos
on this slide for you. These are photos
that I shared with the board last
spring. Um, they are of our loading dock
and as you can see, um, it is in rough
shape. Um, we need to replace our
loading dock because it is literally
falling apart. Um, our anticipated cost
is about $425,000 for our loading dock.
Um, we have also catch basins that need
to be either rebuilt or replaced to the
tune of approximately $58,000.
And then the other important thing is uh
approximately $21,000
for repainting of uh pavement barking.
Um basically that's parking lots uh uh
uh you know access roads. Um the the the
paint that identifies parking spaces
that identifies no parking areas has
faded significantly. And it's a safety
issue for us and students and and staff
and visitors that we we get those
repainted.
um to in order to keep it right at
$500,000, which is what we have
historically tried to do, at least in
the past three years that I've been in
the district going through the budget
process, is we really shoot for a
$500,000 capital budget. Um because we
constantly have needs that need to be
addressed. Um, one of the things that we
historically uh include in our capital
budget is approximately $40,000 to
address sidewalk repairs that need to be
done on an ongoing basis. We have
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of
feet of sidewalk concrete sidewalks. Um,
we actually took that out of the capital
budget uh
for for next year um and actually just
are going to allocate money from this
year's budget to to pay for those
things. But our capital budget again for
next year is $500,000.
>> Colin, on on something like the loading
dock, are you going out to RFP on that?
>> So, I think that there is. So, in a
typical world, yes, we would. But I
think that there are um companies that
are on the state list that negate our
need to go out to loading docks because
um and obviously it's a significant
financial savings for the district. If
we don't have to go out to RFP, if
there's um companies that are on a um a
consortium list or a state list of of
vendors, then it saves us the time and
the money of going out to bid. But
again, the the the um
the proposed amount of $425,000 is came
from a a company that we have worked
with and I think is on our state bid
list, but I can I can confirm that and
get back to you
>> if you would.
>> Please. Thanks.
>> Yep.
I'm just going to make a note.
So the the next slide talks about our um
uh debt bond payment. Uh and I'm really
happy that we are in a good place from
the standpoint of uh you know this next
year uh fiscal year 27 is going to be
the final year of paying our debt
related to the renovation of campus that
was done approximately 20 years ago. um
our final payment of $418,000
is um essentially the same as last
year's uh I'm sorry as as our current
year's payment. So it's really it's it's
budget neutral. I do want to make sure
that I do point out that we do have
significant capital needs. Obviously I
talked about three things, you know, the
the loading dock, the paint, um and
those catch basins. We have significant
needs beyond that. Um we we are very
fortunate that we our buildings and
grounds have been wellmaintained and
improved in many ways. It is imperative
that we continue to ensure that the
needs of our buildings and grounds are
addressed in a time frame where we are
not forced to play catchup uh which is
unfortunately something that a lot of
schools and districts find themselves uh
find themselves in that place. It's
important to note that we are faced with
numerous highcost projects in the very
near future that will require bonding.
Um so we have a facility subcommittee in
the district and um we have worked
closely with that facility subcommittee
and district administration to
prioritize bonding products um to
include several of the things that you
see in front of you. Not that list is
not exclusive. It is not. There are
other things that I did not identify,
but things like roofing at both schools,
HVAC systems and controls, our boilers
and our chillers, life safety, security
and communication, so our alarm systems
and our door access technology, flooring
and sterats,
adding additional parking to the
district um because we don't have enough
parking right now. So, there's a whole
host of things that we are um we're
looking at uh going out to bond for. Um
we're currently working with an
architectural firm, Frier and
Associates, to gain a better
understanding of the financial impact of
the capital projects um that are going
to need to be completed. Um once this is
done, we're going to have a special
board meeting um to discuss these
projects in greater detail and develop a
plan uh for moving forward. So again,
I'm really happy that obviously we're
going to be done with paying off our um
our debt related to the the renovation
of the campus 20 some odd years ago. Um,
but we unfortunately are going to have
to um look at incurring more debt
through the bonding process because we
don't want to kick the can down the road
um and and not maintain our our
facilities um and and major uh systems
within our facilities um because then it
just creates a cycle of we're we're
constantly playing catch-up.
Any questions about that?
All right, I will move on to the next
one then. So this is just a a slide I
always like to include. It's the per
pupil expenditure for secondary regional
school districts in the state. So we are
we've certainly increased from last
year. However, um we do continue to
provide a high quality educational
experience um at a at a cost that is
amongst the lowest in the state when
compared to other regional school
districts.
So talk a little bit about enrollment on
our next slide, next few slides. So we
use NASDAQ to provide enrollment
projections.
This chart shows our October 1
enrollment from 2019 2020 school year to
the current school year as well as the
projections through 2035 2036 and
beyond. Um the projections indicate that
our enrollment re remain will remain
relatively stable over the next 10
years. Next slide, please.
>> Looking at about a 2% decrease this time
from this year to next.
>> I'm sorry. Say again.
>> I'm reading it right. You're looking at
about a 2% drop. You're estimating.
>> I didn't I didn't calculate it, but if
you're if that's if that's what you're
getting, I'm not going to argue with
you.
>> But yes, we're seeing a decrease from
from our current year to next year.
>> All right.
>> Um,
where was the data?
>> And oh, one other question on your per
pupil chart. Your per pupil chart I
noticed it it cut it's done. I think the
2425 year is the last one on there. Is
that it just takes a while to calculate
the current
>> correct the correct the 2526 won't be
available until next year. It's always a
year lag unfortunately.
>> All right. Just checking.
>> Yep.
>> Okay. Can you Yeah, that one. Where was
that data from? What was it called? You
said NA NAS
>> NASDAQ. So, it's the New England
School something council.
Um so we have an affiliation with them.
We send our current student enrollment
um information. Andover uh so Hebrin and
Marbor also send their information to
NASDAQ as well which gives them
projections. Andover does not uh does
not have that affiliation with NASDAQ.
So what we do with Andover is Andover
provides the information to us. We then
send it to NASDAQ and then as a part of
our enrollment projections we we get
them back from from from NASDAQ.
>> Okay. So if I'm looking at the data that
you have online, you you had as of
October 1st, 2025, uh 1,021 students. So
that relates to your yellow line there,
which is 199. So
>> yes,
>> the NAS NASDAQ information was two
students off. So that's pretty good. Um,
all right. Uh, if you can also provide
that to Jim like that the details
regarding NASDAQ that would be great.
>> I can send
>> Oh, perfect. Thank you,
>> Colin. You're excellent. Thank you.
>> I try. Thank you.
>> All right. Um, if we want to go on to
the next one. So, this just shows the
middle school projections were slated to
increase by approximately 50 students
over the next 10 years. Um, at the
middle school, if we want to go to the
next slide, please.
So, this shows high school projections,
current enrollment and projections. Um,
one of the things again, we're we're
slated to remain relatively stable over
the next 10 years at the high school as
well. The one thing that I will note is
that the projections do not factor in
the tuition students from Colombia. Um,
and as I said before, we are optimistic
that our partnership, as our partnership
grows and develops with Colombia, we're
going to continue to be a pretty
attractive school district to them and
for their eighth grade students and draw
more interest from Colombia families.
Um, if we want to go to the next one,
it' be great. So, so as a part of the
projections that are provided to to us
is we have um we get across the board uh
pre-K to grade six enrollment
projections and as you can see they are
projected to remain relatively stable
over the next 10 years uh across all of
our three uh towns that feed into region
8.
Um if we could go to the next slide
please. So, you know, as I noted
earlier, the the the proposed budget
does eliminate four full-time positions.
However, it does include the addition
the the current proposed budget does
include the addition of three of two new
positions that are that I feel are
necessary to address current needs of
the district. The first is a buildings
and ground maintainer, which is a 1.0
FTE. The facilities department that we
have currently has one outdoor
maintainer responsible for all grounds
across our 52 acre campus, including
park parking lots, common areas, and 10
acres of athletic fields.
So, these fields require mowing multiple
times per week, painting, seeding,
fertilizing along with yearround
exterior maintenance. As our campus and
maintenance demands continue to grow,
this work can no longer be sustained by
a single individual. Adding a building
and grounds maintainer would provide
consistent coverage, reduce the need to
pull custodial staff from their core
duties, and ensure that our buildings
and grounds are properly maintained year
round. This position would also be able
to support interior maintenance needs
during the winter seasons uh to improve
safety, efficiency, and overall care of
the district facilities.
So, the second position that had been
proposed in the initial budget to the
board is an instructional technology
specialist coach. So, I'm sure that you
all are not going to be surprised that
technology is woven into pretty much
every part of the school day for
students and staff. Um, from instruction
to assessment to communication, data
analysis.
And as these tools continue to grow and
change, we really need to have
consistent highquality support to ensure
that technology is being used
effectively to enhance teaching and
learning.
At the same time, again, I'm I don't
think I'm going to surprise anybody by
saying that artificial intelligence is
rapidly changing how we learn uh
students learn, work, and think in the
future. Um, colleges and employers are
now expecting graduates to understand
artificial intelligence and use it
responsibly and ethically. Uh, I feel
that creating an instructional
technology coach or specialist would
provide dedicated in-house expertise to
support teachers and students with
technology, digital citizenship,
academic integrity, and ethical AI use.
This full-time position would add
significant value across the entire
district and better prepare students for
what comes next, whatever that will be.
Um, and you know, I I always like to
give the disclaimer that it's really
important to note that the needs of
staff of of students can shift
significantly
and that we may need to hire additional
staff unbudgeted uh to adequately meet
student needs. Um, but that's those are
the personnel uh additions that we're
looking at currently. If we can go to
the next slide.
So, there are some potential changes
that could impact our proposed budget uh
and lead to possible changes again over
the next few months. So, as I said
earlier, health insurance premiums
currently were budgeted for 15%. That
may change. Um I'm sure that you will
hear about that from your uh town and
your local superintendent as
things change, but that could impact our
budget. Uh, as I said earlier, our
Colombia students
currently uh we have anticipated revenue
of $312,764
for next year. uh based off of the
current students that are attending from
Colombia and the number that we
anticipate choosing Colombia for next
year as eighth uh as as incoming ninth
graders um they will identify their high
school of choice um really by the end of
this month and uh the budget will be
adjusted accordingly.
The other thing that I want to make sure
I note is that since presenting the
initial proposed administrative budget
to the board on January 26th, the board
uh we had two workshops, budget
workshops. These workshops provide an
opportunity for each department budget
to be discussed in greater detail and
for board members to discuss the
proposed budget and ask questions. Um,
at the conclusion of the February 9th
budget workshop, the board did ask me to
identify areas of our budget that uh we
would be able to reduce uh the proposed
amount by 2%. So, as I said before, our
initial proposal was a 4.77%
and the board basically tasked me with
the responsibility of coming back to
them with um reductions that would get
us to a 2.77%
increase. Um there was a a collective
concern by board members that um with
the um increases that are feeding
districts such as I I think you guys are
at 11% in in in Andover currently for
the board of ed. Um that you know
basically an 11% increase and a 4.77%
increase would not go over very well
with um members of uh the Marbor sorry
the Andover community. Um so I have been
working with the uh administrative team
uh to identify areas where we could
propose reductions to the board. These
recommendations will be made to the
region 8 board on Monday, February 23rd.
So again, I don't know what the outcome
of that meeting will be. Um but I do
anticipate uh uh having some changes as
a result of that meeting.
Um any questions about those three
issues?
So, the the RAM board of ed asked you
for an additional $700,000 in cuts.
>> Close to $700,000. Yes.
>> Okay.
Thank you.
>> On top of the $800,000 that I've already
made.
>> Understood.
>> Uh, any other questions?
All right. If we can go to the next one.
So I I always think it's really
important to highlight what I call, you
know, the return on investment and, you
know, the community invests obviously a
lot into RAM, you know, middle school
and high school. I I I feel like the
district provides tremendous
opportunities for our students. You
know, we have over 250 courses and 38
concurrent enrollment opportunities at
the high school. And what I mean by 38
concurrent enrollment opportunities, it
means that when we have students taking
classes at Ram High School, they are
actually uh many students are there's 38
classes that we offer that allow them to
earn college credit. It is not uncommon
for me to hear from graduates and speak
with graduates when they come back for
whatever school event is taking place
and tell me that, hey, you know, Dr.
McNamera, I'm graduating in three and a
half years from college or hey, Dr. from
McTame. I just talked to a student um
right before the the winter holiday.
Hey, he said something about graduating
and I said, "Well, wait a second. You're
you've only been in school for, you
know, two two years. How can you be
talking about graduating in three?" He's
like, "I got so many college credits in
high school. I'm graduating in three
years." So, you know, as the father of
two college age students, I would have
very much appreciated them having the
opportunity to to earn a year's worth of
college credits because college is not
cheap. Um, so, you know, again,
significant return on investment. We
have, you know, students that are
performing at very high levels. 356
students are taking AP tests
um or 356 AP tests are taken and we have
students 96% of our students are scoring
at a level three, four or five. Um you
know we have current eth grade students
who are earning
300 high school um credits which again
enables them to take more diverse
classes as high school students
which also enables them to again earn
those college credits when in high
school. So, we just, you know, there's a
lot of really things going on. Uh, if we
can go to the next one, please, it would
be great. Um, you know, we we provide a
tremendous amount of positive
experiences for students beyond academic
achievement. We've been recognized as a
best community for music education for
nine consecutive years. We offer a wide
variety of fine and performing arts
programs and classes that enable our
students to achieve at high levels and
be recognized statewide and nationally
for their hard work. So yes, academics
is obviously a critical thing for us. Um
but it but we do more than just
academics. We know that students come to
school and and and want to do more than
just take classes and and be successful
academically. And and the next slide
actually continues to to demonstrate
that because you know we also offer
plenty of opportunities for students to
demonstate demonstrate their skills and
excel in student as student athletes. Um
we have 13 middle school teams. We um we
have 31 um
31 high school teams. students have
tremendous success on our competition
fields and our basketball courts and our
tracks. Um, student athletes earn
individual acclaim as all state, all
conference and triple threat athletes.
Triple threat means they are three sport
athletes. So they do a fall sport, a
winter sport and a spring sport as well.
So again, tremendous success. If we can
go to the next slide, please. So the you
know I'll just close in saying you know
it represents the budget represents a
collaborative monthslong effort by
district leadership and staff to balance
our responsibility of maintaining high
standards of excellence expected by the
RAM community. Um it's designed to offer
you know the the public a transparent
view of our strategic priorities and
educational programming. Um, you know, I
think I speak on behalf of the
leadership team and the entire district
when I say that we are grateful to the
families and the communities of Hebrando
over and Marorrow for their continued
partnership and and and helping us
prepare students to become, you know,
impactful and members of a global
society. Um, I know I've asked answered
questions along the way, but that
concludes my presentation and I could do
the best that I can to answer any
additional questions that you all might
have for me.
Thanks Colin for that. Anyone uh have
any further questions on the
presentation?
>> No, thank you very much for the
information and anything that you can uh
provide us to give to our members as
additional information would be
appreciated. So, thank you.
>> Yeah, absolutely. So, I'll send the
information over about the loading dock
to y'all and I will, you know, whether
or not we have to go out to bid or or
it's a part of a um uh it's under a
state
uh under the state contract that doesn't
doesn't require that. And then also just
the NASDAQ report. I'm happy to provide
that to you. I think those are the only
two follow-up things that I have. If if
I'm missing anything, let me know. And
what I would say as well is if there's I
know there's not questions now. Um and
that's great because I'm going to go eat
dinner. Um, but if there are additional
questions that come up, you could either
funnel them to Jim and Jim can send them
directly to me or, you know, certainly
my email address is is uh accessible on
the the district website and then as I
said, you know, Scott as a member of the
uh uh region 8 board of education um but
also an Andover um uh community member
um don't hesitate to reach out to him
and and he will funnel the questions to
me as well. I I want to obviously make
sure that everybody has as much
information as possible. Um and I
appreciate your time tonight.
>> Speaking of Scott, he's got his hand up.
Um Scott, did you have something to
throw in thereformationally?
>> Yes. I'd like to offer a slight
clarification. What the board asked
Colin to do was not to give us a
decrease of 2%. but to give us a whole
bunch of scenarios of what if we needed
to cut you know a quarter percent or a
half percent or whatever up to say 2%
from this budget where would we do it
just just to make it clear that that's
you know he was not asked to go cut he
was asked to give us options
yeah I'm going to yeah so if I didn't
explain that correctly Scott thanks for
bringing that to my attention I I'm
going to what I'm going to do on the
23rd is is is bring recommendations to
the board in in a priority party order
um you know and say you know if here
there are some things that are what I
would characterize as no-brainers that
like just easy because you know we
a great example is I I think when we had
initially proposed our our budget to the
board we had a number for fuel from
Andover that was not locked in right so
that like and now now I believe that
Andover has locked in their fuel costs
uh associated with busing I
Um, now we have that number locked in.
And so what I could tell you is that
we're saving $636 by having a locked in
fuel cost. So like that's been added. So
so in totality, but the number that was
was again that that at least I heard
Scott was was come to us with with 2%.
You know, what would it look like if you
were to recommend reductions equaling
the amount of 2% of the overall increase
to get it down to a 2.77?
What would your recommendations be and
what would the priority be? So that's
what I'm I'm going to be prepared to do
with the board
trying to be a good partner for
everybody.
And did do you have and you're muted.
>> Yes. Um, I just was looking at the cost
per pupil expenditure and if I I'm not
sure if I'm doing it right, but if you
divide the total budget and this
proposed 2627 budget by the number of
students, it comes out to over 34,000
per student instead of what it was in
the 2425 year of only 27. That's a
pretty big increase there.
>> Is there some complication to how that
figure is calculated, Colin? That's what
I'm wondering.
>> So, if I could understand how that
number is calculated, I would probably
be a wealthy person because I could
predict like stock market values. So,
it's a it's based off of a state formula
that I'm I'm I not to sound flip, but I
don't necessarily completely understand.
Um, so so that number it's it's again
it's it's it's it's provided by the
state. I'm happy to send that
information over because it's not just
information that's provided by the state
specific to region 8. It's also provided
for every school district in the state
of Connecticut. So I could like it's
literally it's a it's a publicly
available document on the state of educ
on the state website um that provides it
it's called the net current expenditures
per pupil. So I I use NC. I use the term
per pupil expenditure because it's it's
what it is. Um, but it's not a real
number because the reason I say that is
because it doesn't factor in. Remember
how when I talked about the cost of
education for students for Colombia, we
have a base tuition price and then we
have additional costs for things like
special education related services,
things like that, right? So there are
students that attend RAM who don't get
those types of services and and and or
who don't um ride the bus to school and
but transportation is factored in across
the board for every student. Um you know
the the the the total cost of special
education for the entire district is
averaged out across our total membership
but it's not a real number. It's it's
it's a it's based off of a state
formula. And one of the reasons that I
think I've survived for 20 plus years as
a school district leader in the state of
Connecticut is I try not to put too much
weight in what the state provides to us.
Um just because it's it it I think I
would lose my mind if I tried to
understand state formulas for things.
So
it but again Ann, it's it's not a real
number. I'm I'll make a note to send you
all with the that list of the it's
literally it's a spreadsheet that shows
the NC
>> I think I found it um while we while you
were talking if I'm looking at the right
document there's an Excel version and a
PDF version and you're saying it's the
NC number that you're going off of.
>> Correct.
>> Right. And they have Yeah, they have
region 8 here. might be a little bit
different because they updated they
updated
>> very close but it's 27,180
>> they they updated they I think they
updated it twice in the year so it may
have changed from when I initially
provided that information
>> and you know if you if you go and you
look this up if you plug that into a
Google search it come it does come right
up net current expenditures per pupil CT
you'll get the portal and on that portal
if you go to forms documents and forms
there's an opportunity to download
either a PDF version or an Excel version
of this document Andover's on there too.
You can see AES on there as well.
>> Yep.
>> You know, they have them at I think
24,722.
So, as an as a point of comparison,
obviously elementary school versus
regional middle high, but
it's got all the towns there.
>> But yeah, I always understood and the
reason I asked you, Colin, is I always
understood that to be a bit of a black
box. Some stuff going on under the hood
I don't think I understand. So, it's
difficult to explain and for me to try
to explain that to a community member. I
guess we were hoping
>> Well,
it's it's a legitimate question that I I
wish um I wish I could provide some
clarity on. What I could tell you is
that when we
when you know somebody went somebody ear
I think Liz you had asked about you know
how did how did you guys establish the
um you know the base tuition rate for
for Colombia students. We tried to look
at
what that NC was, that per pupil
expenditure for for region regional
school district 8 students, but we like
like I said, if if I went to Colombia
and said, "Hey, we're going to use
$27,000 as your base tuition price,"
they would have said, "Okay, we have
zero interest in that." Like, we're not
going to do it. But that is inclusive of
special education costs, transportation
costs, which which again, that doesn't
apply unilaterally to every Colombia
student. you know, it applies to some
and in the same in the same regard that
those costs don't apply to every RAM
student either, right? Any any student
in Hebrew and over and Marorrow. So the
same idea applies. It's it's that that
that dollar amount is
not it's just not a real number for
every single person like because because
to be honest with you there are students
who are attending an outofstate special
education outplacement program that
might cost $65,000 a year between
tuition and transportation.
So $27,000
isn't a real number for them either.
It's it it goes on the ex it can go on
the low side and it can go on the
extreme high side. And unfortunately
though, it's a it's a mislead
I use it because it's for as much as
it's misleading for us, it's also
misleading for other districts, right?
So So it's but it's what I have as a as
a comparison to demonstrate that
we're still amongst the lowest in the
state, right? And and that number is
going to change. If we see increasing
I'm sorry, if we see decreasing
enrollment over time, the amount of
money to run the district, if we lose 50
students uh or or gain 50 students over
the next 10 years, that number it like
we still have to
heat the building, pay for buses, like
50 student difference in one direction
or the other is not going to have a
substantial increase on our staffing.
it's not going to have a substantial or
change to really much of anything.
It's the challenge of a of a secondary
school district. Whereas, if you look at
student enrollment at an elementary
school district where you say, "Hey, our
incoming kindergarten class is
15 students smaller than our current
kindergarten class or larger. Well,
that's going to impact an elementary
district because you're either going to
have to increase your kindergarten
staffing or potentially decrease your
kindergarten staffing. It doesn't work
that way with a secondary district. It
just it just doesn't, you know. So, I
don't know if that helps or hurts or
confuses, but I uh you know, it's it's
uh it's I can't provide much more
clarity than on that number.
>> Well, I guess what I would say is my
take away from this is as a rough
benchmark, it's there.
>> Yeah. But don't read into it all that
deeply because
it can it can be a little misleading
maybe. Um that's that's my takeaway from
it and but thank you for pointing at it
so I could find it myself. That was
helpful.
>> Sure.
>> I have one more question uh too that
just popped up. Um do you know of any
grants for uh renovations to school
buildings?
>> So that's a great question. So, one of
the things that I could say to you is
that as a part of the process that we're
going through with regards to the
bonding process, um the group that we're
working with, Frier and Associates, they
do a a lot of work with uh school
districts and municipalities. And so,
there is I don't know if I wouldn't say
they're necessarily grants, but there
are reimbursements that are provided for
certain projects. Um and and we're going
to work with fire and associates. You
know, when we talk about, you know,
projects that we need to go out to
bonding for, as I mentioned, roofs, like
roofs are something that qualifies for a
certain um uh state reimbursement um and
a certain percentage and a certain
amount. So um we work with with um
groups like that to identify areas where
hey we need to do this but it's but by
doing this we qualify for certain state
reimbursements and that enables us to to
reduce the impact on our member towns.
There are certainly things for us to to
get um state grants for from time to
time. They pop up from time to time. Um,
I think it was about two years ago, we
were awarded I I think it was a close to
a $300,000 in grants for um air quality,
indoor air quality grants that were
available to local school districts. We
had done some HVAC work to some of the
different areas of our building. Um and
then um the indoor air quality grants
came into existence and we spent some
time applying for those grants and that
uh helped us out to the tune of again
approximately $300,000.
Um so anytime there is an opportunity
for us to um seek state funding or any
type of grant funding for projects that
we either have done and we can
retroactively apply for or um apply for
uh in advance. Uh we we always um seek
those opportunities and and go for those
funds.
>> Thank you.
>> Any other questions?
>> Hearing none, I'm inclined to let you
go, sir. Get yourself some dinner.
>> I appreciate it very much. I thanks guys
for your time. Again, if any questions
pop up, don't hesitate to reach out and
uh have a good rest of your evening.
Okay.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you, Colin. Take care. Thank you.
>> All right. Well, we'll have to see what
the outcome is of uh further
deliberation by the RAM board.
Um so, having gotten that gotten through
that,
I would just like to ask, you know, in a
sense of where are we at on the town
side? How firm are we feeling? Uh, you
know, I haven't had a chance to go
through line by line, uh, the
preliminary document that Lisa sent
around. Um, but if we could get to
follow on that, that would be good. Uh,
you know, what our what our thinking is
in terms of how firm these numbers are,
what still needs to be addressed and so
forth.
>> Jim, why don't you pull that down for a
second so we can just talk?
>> Yeah, it's right here. Y
>> there you go.
>> It was there.
>> It was there. Um, so they are very
preliminary because we've had so much
going on, Rob, that we have not had a
chance, especially with the town
administrator. Um, you know, Jim is
actually leaving uh a week from
Thursday, a week from tomorrow, right
Jim? That's your last day. Um, Lisa has
just gotten engaged
and built the the spreadsheet that we
currently have. So, they are
preliminary. I know that I was looking
at some of the things uh today. We have
to go through some of the union
contracts because I'm not sure that
every one of those uh increases is
exactly where it's supposed to be. So,
um I would tell you in a in from my end
as only one member of the board of
selectmen, I don't sit there and see
that we're significantly going to
increase our prior year budget. I would
say that we have some things that we
have to discuss that we potentially
should do. I believe we should sit there
and spend some additional funding on the
community center. Uh we should buy them
a computer program and do some things to
uh improve uh the services that we
provide to our seniors and to uh
families. So those are things that I
would like to see done. But listen, um,
you know, our role as the board of
selectment, as we get to this is is is
as policy. Your role in the board of
finance is
is, uh, do we have enough money to
support the things that we'd like to sit
there and see done, right? So, your
board's not the policy board. Your
board's the board that sits there and
says, "This is all the money you're
going to get to spend." and hopefully we
can work together to not increase the
total cost to the taxpayers too
significantly. So,
>> yep. Uh so I was just looking at this uh
this chart um on
the total there's a line called total
total expenditures town.
>> Mhm.
>> And it's showing of of an increase of
variance 136,209,
but the percent change is listed as
zero. I'm assuming that's a formula
error. Um,
that'll get cleaned up.
>> We'll fix that. The current the current
the current structure of what um is
listed here for for your guy, you guys,
what you really control the money for
because even though we got the
presentation from RAM, um that is just
strictly a vote of the three towns. Um,
yep. So, right, that's their number is
4,260
or 4,260,000.
That was what we they were dealt with
last year. So, right now we're at um
3,35,829
uh $892, which is 35% of the total
expenditure. And the capital that is
currently listed on there is 1,28,750
or 10.94%
of the the town. That's how you look at
the town. So really 46% town, 54%
AES.
And those numbers are listed there, but
we have to go through those line by line
because all of the uh percentage changes
on the increases. Some of those aren't
going to happen. Some of those need to
be modified. Um we will sit there and
get that to you and by the time you get
this next week, you'll have a much
better
>> feel for what we're going to do. But
>> again, unless unless somebody sits there
and tells me, I mean, I listen, um,
>> you guys are going to have a difficult
year. Um, we're going to have a
difficult year. You're going to have a
difficult year. It's a it's a it's an a
big number. We're going to try to do our
part from a townside to sit there and be
respectful and sit there and have a
number that makes sense.
>> So, I understand that. Um, I was just
trying to take a look at it. see where
it was now. And uh you kind of already
kind of got to my next question, which
is you're saying we're going to get
something updated next week. That's
good. I assume we're targeting to have
that so for our next meeting, we'll have
something firmer.
>> Okay.
>> Can I just say something,
>> please?
>> Absolutely. You're the treasur.
>> Yes. That's that was on purpose for that
formula because your formulas coming
down and going across need to be, you
know, double checked and everything. So
that was on purpose. I didn't if you add
up all those percentages, that's not the
percentage that would be going across.
So, I was waiting to do that. Um, I just
wanted to say a couple quick things. The
worksheets we send out to the
departments will be more explanatory
next year for the departments. I think
they're weak. Um, so we'll have more
data next year. I arrived, you know,
right at budget time, so it was a little
tough. Um,
and um, I also wanted to say in some of
these increases, some of them are a
little more than others, departments did
send some explanations. I don't know if
you want to see some of those
explanations. They're just saying why
some of the lines increased. A few of
them went up higher than others, like
the programming for the seniors. You
know, some of them wrote a little bit of
a script with it. I tried to put it in
the memo over there. I'm still working
on moving that memo column over a little
bit. Um,
and there's forecasted items in there.
That's your choice. I'm here to help
you. Um, I forecasted some of the
electric because some of them their
budget from last year isn't half spent
yet. So, I just kind of forecasted. It's
up to you if you want me to increase
that and just increase it 3% or just
leave it the same. The same with your
revenue. your revenues are left the same
as last year because that's your
decision to tell me do I leave it that
way? Do you predict this is what's going
to happen for your revenue. So um you
know I'm looking for direction from you
at this time.
>> Okay.
>> If memory serves in the past I think we
have done at least a little bit of
revenue projection but I I can't recall
I don't think we did anything very
aggressive with that. I think we're
generally not I mean unless we're doing
it unless we're revalu
>> we're not gonna expect a big change I
think to revenue.
>> Okay.
>> Uh that would be my take. Uh I
personally would like what obviously you
don't want to have the spreadsheet be
totally overrun with this but if there
are little blurbs that explain
substantial ups and downs in
departmental budgets I personally would
like them. In the past, my recollection
is some departments would come and
present to the board of finance. You
know, public works would come, fire
department would come. I don't know uh
what our timing looks like on trying to
do some of that stuff this year, but if
we're not getting that, then I think all
it's all the more important to get
whatever they've given in justification,
you know, even if it's just a few lines
of saying, hey, we're asking for 5%
increase and here are three bullet
points of why.
>> Uh that's better than nothing. I I think
it's really important for the board of
finance to get the department heads in.
So, I would recommend that Eric from uh
the Department of Public Works comes in
front of the board, even if he's just
put in for the first 15 to 20 minutes of
of a meeting for you, Rob,
>> just because it's good to have the
community hear directly from him so they
understand this is public works. this is
who's running it and this is the
requests that are being made. So if you
put the schedule together, we'll sit
there and we should just ask each one of
the individuals to to come.
>> Yeah. I mean, my gut reaction is, you
know, we got a meeting on uh March 11th
that might be good for that. If we can
get some of the department heads in for
that, that might be a good
>> And Carol, you do know that this is a
joint meeting. You can talk at any time.
>> Okay. I didn't want to interrupt. I was
just raising my hand to be polite. Okay.
I apologize for not seeing it, Carol.
>> Okay, Jeff. Jeff is just picking on me.
Um, I just have a question. Jeff, is the
admin assistant I see that line jumped.
Is that what the board of selectman was
discussing with giving the town
administrator a 20our a week admin
assistant?
>> It It was there. You have to remember
that last year, Eric had uh $15,000 that
he wanted to do for project manager.
that's still there, but I'm
>> still there and now the administrative
assistant is there. That that that is
something that we have to discuss as to
what we're going to do with those line
items and what we want to do. That's one
of those items, Carol, that we need to
discuss.
>> Okay. I just saw that it was up by
194.17%.
On that variance, the with the salary
line, there's an additional 10,000
there.
That's why I'm asking. I I do see the
project manager, which we didn't touch
that budget last year, but we're putting
in another 15 in this year.
>> Well, we we have to sit there and go
through it. I mean, we have Christine
Reandazo that has been working with us
related to the uh field and that's what
Eric was trying to um Eric was trying to
sit there and and get uh some
compensation for her so she could do
that and he could do the bridges and the
other projects, but obviously without
air some of this has changed and and we
haven't really made a push to use those
dollars. So we have to as a board go
back and provide back to the board of
finance more refined numbers on some of
these items
and and Carol also we have to decide the
you know the percentage we use 3% as as
a a rate change on compensation but we
have to decide what we're doing on each
one of those lines
>> right and see what the union contracts
say
>> correct
>> are the actual UAL raises,
>> but we really haven't had a lot of time
to look at these.
>> No, there's been a little bit going on.
>> There's been a lot going on. I
understand. So, um,
>> uh, in terms of scheduling, since we're
talking about scheduling, uh, I was
trying to set up the AS presentation to
us. Um, and I was wondering what people
thought about our next meeting, the
25th, the the the board of finance
meeting starting at 7:00 after our joint
session. Uh, whether we want to do it,
target that because I think that date
could work for uh the superintendent
um to present AES to us.
>> You're saying you're saying next
Wednesday?
>> Yeah. Oh, I think
>> the reason the reason I was looking at
this, sorry, just to I don't apologize
for cutting up is I should have
explained this up front. I asked about
the 11th, March 11th, but that's a
regular board of ed meeting. So, I don't
want to go to the 18 March 18th. Man,
we're getting
>> That's too late.
>> I'm starting to worry, right? So, I
asked Val and Caitlyn, could we do the
25th? And I think that is viable for
them. So, I wanted to get people's take
on it
>> because you do know to hold a public
hearing
>> and they set the annual town budget
meeting for, I believe, April 9th. Jeff,
>> that sounds right. I have it all on my
phone.
>> So, you have to plan for that public
hearing, too, to present your finalized
budget.
>> Yep. And you know, if you hold it the
last week in March, you know, the
Wednesday before we're having the annual
town budget meeting, that doesn't give
you many weeks in between.
>> It does not.
>> No.
>> Here's here's the other problem, right,
Louise? You're going to be away next
week and so is Bill.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. That's
>> that's I mean that's why I wanted to
bring this up, but I'm I'm really I'm
looking at the schedule and I'm getting
pretty nervous.
Is there any type of uh voting going on
in that particular meeting?
>> I mean, we don't have to take first of
all, as you know, this is a ongoing
discussion, but
>> my thought was we'd want to get a
presentation and digest it.
>> Um, but that was that's just that's me
speaking. Uh, you you guys can have your
opinions, but yes, ideally, I would not
have it at a meeting where you and Bill
are out.
>> Okay.
>> Uh, you know, that would be my first
choice. But if we, you know, get through
the presentation, maybe you guys could
watch it and then we could
>> our 11th meeting, March 11th meeting,
>> talk about it further.
>> That that's all I'm thinking about. I'm
just looking at the calendar here and
I'm trying to find a date. Um, and it
gets it gets tight fast. Uh, you know,
it's it is indeed April 8th, at least
that's what my phone for the the town
budget meeting, which means the f April
1st would be theformational
>> board of finance presentation,
>> you know, for public comment.
>> Public hearing,
>> Robert, we we moved it to the 9th on
Thursday to avoid the board of education
meeting.
>> I see. Okay. I've
>> It's still listed. It's still listed on
the town calendar as the 8th, but it has
been moved to the 9th to avoid
>> a conflict with the board of education.
>> All right. Well, I'll move that in in my
phone then just because um I don't want
to I don't want to get messed up. All
right. Well, the point being is just
looking at the weeks. Um the pri the
week prior that's going to be
ourformational session at which point I
would certainly hope we had a working
plan. So, you know, that gives us
basically, you know, this month and next
to sort this out. Uh, so I'm just that's
the reason I was I brought up the 25th.
I know it's tight. I know we have
members not going to make the meeting.
Um the 11th being a board of ed meeting
is you know the other option I guess we
could look at
is seeing if we could do something um on
the 12th
move our meeting
>> 12th 10th or 12th.
>> Yeah. Um
yeah something that's that I guess would
be the other option. Uh if we want if we
want to see we'd have to obviously
canvas the board for availability, but
if we're trying to avoid having this on
a night when we're down two members,
that would be
>> right.
>> That would be the thought. But the way I
left it with um Caitlyn and Val was that
I'd talk to you guys and get back to
them.
So any other thoughts? I mean Nick,
Heather, anybody else have availability
issues like on any of these weeks? Can
Can you think of anything that we should
avoid?
>> I'm looking at my calendar. I'm pretty
much free. Those the 10 the next week is
fine. The 4th, the 10th, the 12th. I'm
good for all of those.
>> Mhm. And I guess that's the other thing.
I don't think we have anything scheduled
for the fourth.
>> We don't, but I won't be here for the
fourth.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> Which is suboptimal.
>> I mean, I won't be here. I'll be on a
I'll be on a cruise ship, which I may or
may not be able to call into.
>> Cruise ship Wi-Fi. I don't know if I'd
be relying on
>> I'm just saying
>> I don't know. I I I understand. I do.
>> The timing is not good. Um you know me,
I don't like to miss meetings. So,
>> I can if people want me to, I can go
back to Kate Caitlyn and Val and ask
about the 12th. The the 12th would work
better than the 10th for me. Um, but I I
can look at those dates. Um,
>> Kim Kim,
>> if people want to
>> say something,
>> I do I I would like to just not have it
on the 25th at all so that we have
everyone there, February 25th. Is that
the date that we were?
>> Yeah, that's next week. And I would like
to just either have it on March
um 10th or the 12th as well, just so we
have everyone present on the board of
finance.
And I can make both of those dates. So,
whatever works.
>> All right. I'll reach back out and see
if we can make one of those dates work.
>> Yeah. And if if we do, you know, people
agree that if we're doing it that week,
we would move our currently scheduled
special meeting
>> to that other day and not do a double
not double up. Is that I mean, what do
people want to do there? I personally
think if we already have Yeah. If we we
would move the meeting. Yeah. Um Okay.
>> My
Okay.
>> Sorry. Go ahead, Liz.
>> Yeah. I guess my only concern is if if
we felt we were able to recommend a
change
>> that doesn't give them much time
>> to do anything and it doesn't give us
any time to look doesn't really get us
time to digest it either. I mean
>> I mean there's not much to digest. We
saw the presentations.
>> Yeah. Uh now and in between now and then
I guess is really what it boils down to.
I mean, the presentation's nice.
Um, but the information is already out
there. So,
>> if if they came on the 25th next week,
it's recorded and everything and we're
not going to vote on anything, right?
So,
>> well, again, I mean, it's it's a regular
meeting. We could theoretically take
votes but on you know in relation to it
but I my personal take would be
especially if we did next week where we
gave us some more time is to get the
presentation ask questions think about
it and come back with a full board
because again we're down two members
>> right
>> and come back at the next meeting where
we have everybody before we you know do
anything further but that that would be
my take if we do it that way if we do it
on say March 12th picking one of those
dates then we hopefully would have a
full board already there and we you know
we might act accordingly. That's my
that's my gut.
>> Right. But like Liz says that doesn't
give them much time after.
>> It does not. It does not. It's it's not
ideal.
So that's why I looked at the 25th even
knowing we were going to be down people.
Uh but I completely understand. I really
do understand the take that not with two
people out. What's up, Lisa?
>> I'm okay if we do it the 25th and I can
we can review it, but I just want to
make sure that we can hold up on any
type of voting until we're all present.
>> I I I I think that's fair enough. I I
think that would be my preferred
approach as well.
>> So we can get it over with and then, you
know, we can all kind of watch it and
then determine it afterwards.
>> All right. And then we would and then we
would have our meeting on the 11th.
We could, you know, we'd have everybody.
Okay. Um I'm okay with that, too. I'm
fine with that. I can reach out back out
to to Val and ask her to come for the
25th.
I assume Bill would be okay with that as
well. You know,
>> I I I think probably I could try texting
him and see if I get an answer, but
>> I know he's out. Yeah,
>> I know. It's not great. Uh he just he
was away for two weeks, so
>> Okay.
>> I don't really feel bad for Bill. He's
on a cruise ship enjoying the weather.
Yeah, we've got some lovely weather this
evening here at home. Huh?
>> Everyone's going on cruises.
>> Not me.
>> Well, um All right. So, we also had
gotten a request from um AHM
>> uh to come and talk to us and
But I don't think, you know, this it was
too late to get them in this meeting.
So, and then I don't know if we want to
tack them on to a meeting where we're
already having AS. So, my thought would
be we we maybe push AHM to March 11th if
that makes sense
or well assuming we do March 11th, but
yeah.
Does anybody have thoughts on that?
That's usually not a huge number, but
>> we could probably have them come in
>> first first get it over with and
probably won't take that long.
>> I I don't expect it's usually, you know,
an hour presentation or anything,
>> right? Don't they usually ask two people
from each town to come and vote on their
budget? And do we know when that is?
Yeah, that's the thing is I think that's
still up in the air. Hang on, let me
find the most recent email because it's
been kind of going back and forth.
Uh
goodness,
I actually did that last year.
>> Yeah.
>> And I'd be open to do that again, but I
I'd be voting after everyone decides,
>> right?
Right. Oh, yes, there it is. Um,
historically, our meeting consists of
two representatives from each town.
Typically, a town manager, I think she
means administrator, whatever, along
with some one the town administrator
designates from board of finance or
board of selectmen. So, so here's
another issue, a little wrinkle. Um,
obviously our interim town administrator
is leaving. Uh so we could designate we
as the two boards are here. We could
designate one person from each
to be the AHM contact folks and try to
set something up, you know, and not try
to have to to link it up with one of our
meetings necessarily.
>> Believe I was designated from the board
of selectmen this year to be the contact
for AHM, but I haven't really heard
anything. I don't know if they did get
my name. I tried contacting them.
>> Uh yeah, Tesa emailed Jeff and I and a
few other folks CCD, but uh didn't send
it to the entire boards. Um
so I mean Jeff's got it. He he could
hopefully send it around to the rest of
the board of selectmen and uh maybe we
could coordinate. Um, you know, anybody
on the board of finance want to step up
this year for to be our AHM rep?
>> I'll do it again.
>> Do it again.
>> It's a very helpful organization.
>> Oh, they're great. Uh, they're great.
>> So, I No, no question there. So, so I
mean I personally
>> just as a just as a just as a side
thing, they they sent um
>> that meeting was scheduled for February
28th.
>> Oops.
>> Oh, this is 2025.
I did a search on. So,
>> I've got correspondence here from them.
I don't know if this is what you're
talking about. We'll get it to you and
so and we'll usually Kate gets all that
information and then Kate forwards it
out. But we'll sit there and see where
we're at with it. Yeah, this one this
there was an email
>> this Tuesday in the morning uh from
Tresa responding to me because I had her
initial email
had come out February 12th to Jeff and I
and I responded just kind of giving her
our meeting dates because I wasn't quite
sure uh what we wanted to do yet. Uh,
and her response email was on Tuesday.
But again, it's it's to Jeff and I with
a couple of folks CCD, but no other
board members.
>> Uh, I am forwarding it to you right now.
Thank you,
>> Louise. Uh, I'm going to go ahead and
forward this to you.
>> Okay.
>> I believe that's the most recent one. I
don't see
further.
All right. So, that's Ahm. We've talked
about AES presentation. I'll get I'll go
back and it sounds like we are going to
try for the 25th. If for some reason
that falls apart, I'll see about the
12th or something. But for now, Yep.
>> I'm sorry. I do. We have a We have a
meeting on the 25th. Do we not have one
the 4th?
>> We don't have one on the 4th. At least
as far as I recall.
>> Well, we have one on the 11th.
>> We do.
>> Okay. I just have it backwards on my
thing. That's fine. Thank you. Did you
know I had something on my calendar on
the 4th as well?
>> Maybe I'm wrong. Hold on.
>> I have a board of finance.
>> I thought it was like one of our
workshops. I could be wrong.
>> It should be. I mean, looking at it and
how tight everything is, I kind of feel
like there should be one.
>> So, let me I don't know why I wouldn't
have had that in my phone, though,
because I tried to plug them all in. So,
>> I thought that's what I did, but maybe I
thought maybe I did it wrong.
>> No, I'm I'm just I'm I'm looking. Hang
on. I'm gonna
>> have to look double check now because I
I probably it's probably by mistake. Um
>> uh
>> I don't want to miss one by accident.
>> I don't see it on the calendar
town calendar.
>> You have Zoom meetings set up for the
4th and the
update in a second. March 4th, March
18th, she has BF budget meeting.
>> Oh, wait. Sorry. the the the month. This
is March. That's weird. Why is it Why
isn't it coming up? H
uh is it under is it under only the
boards of commissions page? Maybe it's
there.
>> I think I got it from the very first
meeting when they when you sent out the
list of them.
>> I mean, I'm just I'm just looking at the
town calendar right now and I just don't
see it. You
>> Yeah, I don't see it on the town
calendar either. Um
>> whereas our 11th,
18th and 25th meetings are there.
>> Mhm.
>> You know, personally, you said you were
going to be away, Liz, but
>> I'm going to be away.
>> I'm not opposed to having
>> additional meetings. uh if we have
something to discuss, something to to
chew over. So,
>> right,
>> I'm trying to remember now. I mean, if
we didn't do that, we we probably didn't
do it for a reason, and I just don't
remember what it was that we wouldn't
have picked the fourth.
Um
but yeah, it's not on there.
Now, in terms of in the past when we've
had the fire department, I mean, it's
usually I think Wall-E who comes and
talks to us. I I can't recall how that
was usually set up, whether the town
administrator, whether Eric had set that
up in the past, you know, bring in when
we did these coordinated, you know,
bring in public works to talk to us,
bring in fire department, talk to us,
uh, or whether it was something that
Mark handled directly with those
commissions.
>> I think Eric did everything. I I suspect
that that
>> we're feeling it now. We're feeling it
now.
>> Yeah. Um because uh when did you say uh
the last day was next Thursday?
>> Next Thursday. But if you want I can get
an email out to department heads for
March 11th and get as many there as you
are there particular ones you want. Um
>> I mean generally public works I think is
a good one to have.
uh the fire department whenever if you
know if they have a budget ready uh we
usually do them.
>> I think I think they do. Lisa,
>> let me let me ask a question. I don't
know Jeff if this is not a right
question. How do you folks handle
um regional um services? Um I I haven't
had a chance to get them to Lisa yet, I
don't think, because she's got a million
other things she's been doing. But I've
got on my desk, you know, Nikko, Niko
Animal Control, Eastern Highlands.
They've all given me Yeah, they've all
given me um
>> and I have those,
>> Jim. Those are in
>> I did give them to you.
>> Yeah,
>> they would be
>> They're in this budget already. They're
already in
>> Oh, good. Okay. The Manchester proate
estimate.
>> Yeah, we usually, I think, just have
those plugged into our our chart. Yeah.
>> Whatever I have, I've got in is in
there. Whatever Jim is talking, whatever
has been given to me is in there.
>> Make sure probate one.
>> We always have to the one for the one
for Nik is in there related to animal
control right now. It's something that
we have to look at because they're
trying, you know, there's an increase in
the animal control side of this and and
all of those would be in there. And then
hopefully what we can do is
provide you the details related to it so
you can at least look at it and then ask
any questions. But for the most part on
those shared services, it would be
here's the bill that's being proposed.
Yep.
>> Are we willing to accept it or do we
have to go out and look for an
alternative? And and a lot of those
shared services, it's really hard
because it's something along the lines
of animal control. And
>> we're not going to do those services.
not a position to do that in house.
That's just
>> so we've we've had communication with
other towns related to that and it's
just something that if we can find a
better deal, we would probably sit there
and go with it. But what we should do is
in the comment section of Lisa's budget
is put,
you know, if there's a line item such as
Nikcog Nikko bill attached or NE need
bill available, we'll sit there and do
that and then and Carol, you can sit
there and we can go through the probate
court and say here's the the estimate
and it's attached. So
>> that'll be helpful.
>> That that was the documentation I was
talking about earlier. whatever I put in
there that's for this year. If it's a
new figure, I have the backup. That's
why I wondered if you wanted to see it.
>> Can I I just tell you what I used to do
as far as bringing in all of these
departments.
We my my list of meetings does say the
third, the 4th, and the 11th of March.
And I think I got this off the the board
page, but
>> I just Yeah, I just found it is on
November 19th board page,
>> right? approval or whatever because you
would approve and what we used to do is
approve the budget calendar in December.
The board of finance would and every
department would be listed. You'd have
like six departments, six departments,
six departments and then they would have
an assigned night that they would come
in and speak to you about their budget.
they could pass on it or they would come
in and you're right, the fire
department, public works, they have
bigger budgets, but they were like
assigned nights to come and talk to you
because, you know, you have so many
meetings. You'd have six one night, six,
and they're the most of them are brief.
It's not like the school, but that's how
we used to get everybody in to talk
about their budget. We would schedule
them in and if they couldn't make it
that night, they would like let us know,
well, that's the Mass Fire Chiefs
Association. Can you make me another
night? and you put them on a different
night. So, it was just it was in the
schedule like with this it was in the
schedule what department would be there
that night. So, that that's just what we
did in the past.
>> Great. Um All right. And if we've got a
meeting on the fourth, well, that gives
us a little extra wiggle room. So, uh
I'll plan on that. And if we can get,
you know, on for the fourth we can get
public works or some of these other
folks in. Great. Well, Louise, what was
that? Yeah, I've been reading the letter
that just sent over about the AHM AHM
and apparently they already had their
meeting February 10th and I guess they
had contacted Jim and no one had
attended. So what they're looking for is
the person that they can get up to speed
and I'd be happy to do that because I
was the person from last year.
>> Yeah, you have continuity there.
>> All right. So let me let me do that.
I'll get us up to speed and everybody
know,
>> you know,
>> we I'm sending an email right now to her
for both of us.
>> Oh, that would be great.
>> Okay. And then we can see what we can
do.
>> Perfect. Thank you.
>> Great.
>> Did they give a presentation that was
recorded? Did they say
>> I don't think it was recorded last year?
I don't think it was recorded, but I can
find we can find out. Ann, can you ask
that in your in your email?
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> Yeah. And maybe if we could get a copy
of their budget for anybody that wants
to look at it because I'd kind of like
to look at it. Um I'd like to know what
we're getting out of it, how much
utilization we're using out of it, and
um
can we be maximizing them some way?
>> Maximizing their services, you know,
just have questions. My rec Yeah, my
recollection is they've been actually
the the services have been utilized more
heavily in recent years than a lot.
>> Uh but yeah, I mean any detail we can
get be great.
>> Okay.
>> Uh I don't recall our contribution being
>> a huge number.
>> It wasn't.
>> They do the birth to three services
which is always great. I don't know if
it's birth to five now, but birth to
three evaluations of kids and they do a
bunch of different stuff. Then they were
doing a lot of mental health stuff I
think if my research Louise did
recently.
>> But yeah, anything get us. Thank you for
taking that on. I appreciate it.
>> All right.
So, yeah, let's see if we can get some
town departments in for the 4th and or
11th. See what we can do for
availability there.
Um
right now everybody I think you know
take a look at but understand what's
been presented to us thus far is very
preliminary.
You know it's going to board still has
to go over it some more. Um,
see, oh, I had a question. I apologize
to go back a meeting. Jeff, I had a
question that I meant to ask you, you
and Jim, the last meeting uh that we had
had, but Jim was under the weather that
night and whatnot. And I and we ended up
talking about other stuff and it flew
out of my mind. There was something I
saw in the admission report uh last
meeting about um some fraudulent check
flags from Mnt. Can you explain what
happened there?
>> Sure. Somebody Well, every check that
you send out, even as an individual, has
the bank routing number and the account
number on it. And
what
uh scammers have been doing is taking
the routing number and the account
number and putting it on check stock and
creating their own checks and then
sending the checks out and signing them
and they get processed through the bank.
And when you reconcile, you sit there
and you find these things. So to be
really honest, this is a really big
problem for us right now. It's something
that we're dealing with the bank. Um
Lisa has been reconciling the bank
account and this weekend she identified
some additional transactions that were
not checks that were a transactions. So,
um we have been dealing with Mnt on this
issue related to um
you know, we're probably going to end up
having to change our account. Not for
any reason that you're not going to get
this to happen again, but just because
we I believe our number our numbers are
circulating out there.
>> Not only do we have the check issues,
Rob, we have some AC issues.
So in an a transaction, someone um
outside from the bank is requesting to
pull funds from our account and the M&T
Treasury Department is sitting there and
should be flagging those and identifying
those transactions and cutting them off
right then and there. But we're now in
the process and Lisa has gone through
Monday, Tuesday trying to get the bank
to sit there and identify
uh that these are transactions that we
have not requested be completed. So,
>> and as things stand, do we have a sense
for
what the financial impact of this is to
the town?
>> Oh, it should be zero.
>> Okay. That's what I'm
>> hopefully. Right. if
>> it's an it's a nuisance. It is something
that, you know,
>> Lisa didn't sign up for.
>> I mean, to be really honest, she she sat
there and
>> identified. So, listen, I I'll just tell
you, she's she's been
>> uh completing the reconciliations on the
accounts. Um, and our account setup is a
little little interesting, but she she
is good. And over the weekend, she was
doing January's reconciliation. So,
she's getting up. She's finishing the
general account and reconciling for the
month of January. And then she's sending
information saying, "Jeff, here are
these transactions that are on our
account. What do what do I do with these
and what are they?" And I'm like, "Those
are fraud." So, to be really honest, on
Sunday, was it Sunday?
>> Yeah.
>> Was it Sunday? It was Sunday.
>> I think so. Yeah. It Sunday, I was there
doing it. Yes,
>> it was Sunday. And um
because to me it's a big deal. while I
was on the phone with the bank for two
hours trying to get through their to
their treasury and fraud department to
sit there and just get it on record that
we've identified these transactions and
you need to deal with it. Well,
the first time I was on for the hour,
they hung up on me. And then the second
time I was on for the hour, I got
through and they said they couldn't do
anything for us because if if it was a
credit card transaction, they could help
me. But with it being an a transaction,
they couldn't. So
Jim returned from uh his trip and uh he
communicated with Mnt on Monday and
we're in the process of getting this
resolved, but there should be zero
financial consequence to the town
because we didn't approve the
transactions.
>> All right, I'm just checking. I mean, I
didn't know if they weren't caught in a
certain period of time or there, you
know, we could be up a creek. So that's
why I asked. And even the checks, the
checks, if I understood this correctly,
the checks were identified by Mnt's
fraud department.
>> The AC said in the report, yeah,
>> the AC transactions were not.
>> We found those. Okay.
>> We found those.
>> Lisa, Lisa, we didn't find those. Lisa
found
>> Lisa. Okay.
>> Thank you, Lisa.
>> It looked rather strange.
>> I appreciate that rundown because it had
been noodling. They've been rattling
around in the back of my head since our
last
>> meeting. And none of these should have
any impact none of these should have an
impact on us.
>> Okay, that's that's good to hear.
>> Yeah, I can't promise you that. But
we're working on it.
>> Yeah, we are.
>> Right. That's the that's that last bit.
You can't promise me that. That was that
was, you know, working it way through my
head. But hopefully we get through this
and Mnt is stand up about it and we uh
and we end up owing nothing. But okay.
Okay. Well, thank you for that rundown
that just have been bugging me.
So, you know, other than the things
we've already discussed, the RAM
presentation, the preliminary numbers
that Lisa has sent around to us, do any
other members of the boards
have anything else they want to bring
forward tonight?
you know, we are at almost two hours in.
So,
>> are we going to discuss the email
>> that we got today?
>> Um, you talking about the attorney
opinion regarding our roles and
responsibilities to the budget.
>> I mean, I personally wanted more time to
read through it and digest it. I have
I've read through it, but I've read
through it skimming it frantically about
an hour ago. Not an hour ago, an hour
before our meeting started. Um, and it's
also my understanding that um we may be
getting an opinion from the a board of
ed attorney. So I my thought is why
don't we talk about that uh either next
time or on our March 4th meeting
>> and it has to be on your agenda because
this is a special
>> this is a special yeah
>> we have our next meeting is a regular
our next meeting is a regular meeting so
we can add and delete uh to those
>> you know to that agenda as we will
>> yeah you don't need to discuss that you
don't need to discuss that here tonight
you need to be aware of it and And I'm
I'm all for Shipman and Goodman sitting
there and providing an opinion in the
town having to spend more money on that
because the lawyer that writes the or
has written the educational law book is
Shipman and Goodman. So, let's go. So,
you know, I think it's I think that's
interesting in and of itself, but read
the opinion and then we can all discuss.
And I would also tell you one other
thing. Go look at every other town
and go look at the other towns and and
their board of finance and what they do.
That's all you got to do. So,
let's go next time.
All right.
Well,
I think that's the right call to give
people to some time to digest it. And
you know, we have a meeting in a week
and it's a regular meeting,
so we can do what we want with the
agenda right at the beginning of the
meeting, additions, deletions, etc.
Um,
given that we're two hours in and I've
kind of worked through my little list,
you know, if I if I hear nothing further
from the board members, then I'd like to
do a round of uh public speak and go
ahead and move to adjournment. Is uh
everybody okay with that? Anybody have
any objections, thoughts?
Any any other board of selectment meet
members have any comments?
>> Right.
>> Anybody on the board of finance have any
comments to share? Let's
>> both boards.
>> Let's do it.
Well,
hearing none,
I guess I'll go around um and ask for
public comment before we wrap this up.
So, I don't think we have as many people
left. Let's see.
That's That's Lisa. That's
okay. Joanne,
just wanted to say good luck in the
process. I know it's a long one. And I
want to commend the treasurer for all
her hard work and efforts and seems to
be doing a wonderful job there. that
will be so helpful in such a new new
staff members in your building. Thank
you.
>> I have a comment. Um on the agenda, it
doesn't mention public speak after the
>> Oh, does it not? I apologize. I I had
when I pulled up Sorry. When I pulled up
one of the other PDFs, it killed my
meeting agenda. I don't know why my
computer's doing that. Um All right.
>> Normally, we do two rounds in our
meetings. That's the reason I just by
creature of habit I I just defaulted to
it.
>> It's not on the agenda. I don't know. We
might want to
>> want to put that back in there. We
usually do a public comment at the end
of our meetings. So maybe next meeting
we can alter the agenda for that
purpose. But if the agenda is what it is
and I'll abide by it. Thank you, Louise.
>> Okay.
>> Um but again everybody for if you didn't
get heard uh at the end of this meeting
just you know we have a meeting in a
week. Um if you can make it great. Um,
and as I mentioned to everybody here, I
will reach back out to Valerie and see
if she can come and present to us. 25th,
we'll make sure the recording happens.
Liz
and uh, and everybody else help me. You
know, let's make sure on this one
because this is now a couple times we've
had a little bit of a snaf. We're gonna
have some members who aren't here.
>> Not so easy to
>> It's I'm focusing on, you know, trying
to get the meeting going and I
apologize. I am still new at this and I
just missed it. All right. Uh in that
regard, do I have a motion to adjurnn?
>> I'll make a motion to adjurnn. I'll
second that.
>> Thank you. You too. Any discussion?
All right. All in favor?
>> I
>> I.
Any opposed? Stansions, etc. All right,
everybody. Thank you very much. Um, we
have a lot more to do.